Article for Day 18 (#209)
scalacenter/scala-advent-of-code: docs/2022/puzzles/day18.md

https://adventofcode.com/2022/day/18

## Solution

### Part 1

> The first part turns out to be fairly straight forward.  A cube has six sides, so if we count the total number of cubes and multiply this by six, we just need to subtract the number of connected sides.  We'll need to be able to check if two cubes are adjacent, so lets first define a function for that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To solve the first part, first count the total number of cubes and multiply this by six (as a cube has six sides), then subtract the number of sides that are connected. 

As this requires checking if two cubes are adjacent, lets first define a function for identifying all adjacent cubes:
```

```scala
def adjacent(x: Int, y: Int, z: Int): Set[(Int, Int, Int)] = {
  Set(
    (x + 1, y, z),
    (x - 1, y, z),
    (x, y + 1, z),
    (x, y - 1, z),
    (x, y, z + 1),
    (x, y, z - 1)
  )
}
```

> Note since cubes are given to be 1⨉1⨉1, we can represent cubes as a single integral `(x, y, z)` coordinate which makes up the input for this function.  Then two cubes are adjacent (ie one of each of their sides touch) if and only if exactly one of their `(x, y, z)` components differ by one, and the rest by zero.

Reviewer: This also adds a nice info box
```suggestion
:::info
Note that since cubes are given to be 1⨉1⨉1, they can be represented as a single integral `(x, y, z)` coordinate which makes up the input for the `adjacent` function.  Then two cubes are adjacent (i.e. one of each of their sides touch) if and only if exactly one of their `(x, y, z)` components differ by one, and the rest by zero.
:::
```

Now given our cubes, we can implement our strategy in a fairly straight-forward manner with a `fold`:
```scala
def sides(cubes: Set[(Int, Int, Int)]): Int = {
  cubes.foldLeft(0) { case (total, (x, y, z)) =>
    val adj = adjacent(x, y, z)

>     val noAdj = adj.filter(cubes).size
>     total + 6 - noAdj

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    val numAdj = adj.filter(cubes).size
    total + 6 - numAdj
```

  }
}
```

> We use a `Set` for `O(1)` membership lookups which we need to determine which adjacent spaces for a given cube contain other cubes.

Reviewer: citing [the docs](https://docs.scala-lang.org/overviews/collections-2.13/performance-characteristics.html) im not sure we can say `O(1)` for immutable set (its listed as "effectively constant")
```suggestion
We use a `Set` for membership lookups which we need to determine which adjacent spaces for a given cube contain other cubes.
```

Author: I've removed the reference to `O(1)`, and said they're 'fast' with a link to the docs, since I wanted to provide some justification of using a set rather than say a list - what do you think of this?

### Part 2

The second part is a bit more tricky.  Lets introduce some nomenclature: we'll say a 1⨉1⨉1 empty space is on the *interior* if it lies in an air pocket, else we'll say the space is on the *exterior*.

A useful observation is that if we consider empty spaces which have a [taxicab](https://adventofcode.com/2022/day/18) distance of at most two from any cube, and join these spaces into [connected components](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Component_(graph_theory)), then the connected components we are left with form distinct air pockets in addition to one component containing empty spaces on the exterior.

This component can be easily identified since the space with the largest `x` component will always lie in it.  So we can determine empty spaces in the interior adjacent to cubes like so:

```scala
def interior(cubes: Set[(Int, Int, Int)]): Set[(Int, Int, Int)] = {

>   val allAdj = cubes.flatMap(c => adjacent(c._1, c._2, c._3).filterNot(cubes))

Reviewer: readability improvement for Scala 3
```suggestion
  val allAdj = cubes.flatMap((x, y, z) => adjacent(x, y, z).filterNot(cubes))
```

>   val sts = allAdj.map { adj =>
>     adjacent(adj._1, adj._2, adj._3).filterNot(cubes) + adj

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  val sts = allAdj.map { case adj @ (x, y, z) =>
    adjacent(x, y, z).filterNot(cubes) + adj
```

  }
  def cc(sts: List[Set[(Int, Int, Int)]]): List[Set[(Int, Int, Int)]] = {
    sts match {
      case Nil => Nil
      case set :: rst =>
        val (matching, other) = rst.partition(s => s.intersect(set).nonEmpty)
        val joined = matching.foldLeft(set)(_ ++ _)
        if (matching.nonEmpty) cc(joined :: other) else joined :: cc(other)
    }
  }
  val conn = cc(sts.toList)

>   val exterior = conn.maxBy(_.maxBy(_._1))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  val exterior = conn.maxBy(_.maxBy(_(0)))
```

  conn.filterNot(_ == exterior).foldLeft(Set())(_ ++ _)
}
```
Where the nested function `cc` is used to generate a list of connected components.  We can now slightly modify our `sides` function to complete part two:

```scala
def sidesNoPockets(cubes: Set[(Int, Int, Int)]): Int = {
  val int = interior(cubes)
  val allAdj = cubes.flatMap(adjacent)
  allAdj.foldLeft(sides(cubes)) { case (total, (x, y, z)) =>
    val adj = adjacent(x, y, z)
    if (int((x, y, z))) total - adj.filter(cubes).size else total
  }
}
```

Lets put this all together:

```scala

> @main def main() = {
>   val cubesIt = scala.io.Source.fromFile("input18").getLines().collect {
>     case s"$x,$y,$z" => (x.toInt, y.toInt, z.toInt)
>   }
>   val cubes = cubesIt.toSet
>   println(sides(cubes))
>   println(sidesNoPockets(cubes))
> }

Reviewer: Typically we accept code like this - which is required to accept input from the text boxes of the in-article solver
```suggestion
def part1(input: String): Int = sides(cubes)
def part2(input: String): Int = sidesNoPockets(cubes)

def cubes(input: String): Set[(Int, Int, Int)] =
  val cubesIt = input.linesIterator.collect {
    case s"$x,$y,$z" => (x.toInt, y.toInt, z.toInt)
  }
  cubesIt.toSet
```

    sts match {
      case Nil => Nil
      case set :: rst =>
        val (matching, other) = rst.partition(s => s.intersect(set).nonEmpty)
        val joined = matching.foldLeft(set)(_ ++ _)
        if (matching.nonEmpty) cc(joined :: other) else joined :: cc(other)
    }
  }
  val conn = cc(sts.toList)
  val exterior = conn.maxBy(_.maxBy(_(0)))
  conn.filterNot(_ == exterior).foldLeft(Set())(_ ++ _)
}
```
Where the nested function `cc` is used to generate a list of connected components.  We can now slightly modify our `sides` function to complete part two:

```scala
def sidesNoPockets(cubes: Set[(Int, Int, Int)]): Int = {
  val int = interior(cubes)
  val allAdj = cubes.flatMap(adjacent)
  allAdj.foldLeft(sides(cubes)) { case (total, (x, y, z)) =>
    val adj = adjacent(x, y, z)
    if (int((x, y, z))) total - adj.filter(cubes).size else total
  }
}
```

Let's put this all together:

```scala
def part1(input: String): Int = sides(cubes(input))
def part2(input: String): Int = sidesNoPockets(cubes(input))

def cubes(input: String): Set[(Int, Int, Int)] =
  val cubesIt = input.linesIterator.collect {
    case s"$x,$y,$z" => (x.toInt, y.toInt, z.toInt)
  }
  cubesIt.toSet
```

> Which gives use our desired results.

Reviewer: We still need to accept community solutions
```suggestion
Which gives use our desired results.

## Solutions from the community

Share your solution to the Scala community by editing this page. (You can even write the whole article!)
```
